```yaml
stripHtml: false
includeToC: false
published: true
contentHash: 7819b4bbef5e5107c32b69335a8fcf031ee1caee0678bdffb826c9b2c3cac5c7
firstPublish: '2017-02-26T06:48:46.417057+00:00'
lastRender: '2017-11-01T20:51:08.370676+00:00'

```
---

#a Concise Guide To The Art of Rationality

We can improve our lives by thinking. Both on the global scale through science 
and engineering, and personally by simply making better decisions in our own lives.

It's *important* to note that that doesn't mean making the "best decisions",
that there's one obvious path that everyone should take. Rationality is a tool
that can help you accomplish your goals, and notice when your goals are
self-contradictory or hurting you, but it doesn't tell you *what* those goals
are. That only comes from looking in your self.

But hopefully it will help you accomplish them.

"Rationality" draws on many different fields, and has one guiding rule, whatever
works *works*. If rationality isn't helping you accomplish your goals then it's
not rationality.

---

#The Valley of Bad Rationality

Rationality is bad when it *doesn't* help you accomplish your goals. Sadly,
that's all too common.

The language of rationality can be used as a bludgeon. To try to make yourself
feel smarter, to attack your enemies, to reinforce your incorrect beliefs. This
is terrible, both for you and the rationalist community.

It's natural to apply these techniques just a *little bit* harder to points you
disagree with then to points that back up your beliefs. That's the first step to
becoming a biased person.

Rationalists sometimes learn a whole bunch of new stuff and then get over
confident. Remember that common sense comes first. If you think you've got some
clever idea that flies in the face of common wisdom, you probably don't. Make
sure you don't bet too much on it.

#Probabilities, not certainties

One of the first mistakes budding rationalist make is often thinking in
absolutes. That is, using "logic". What they mean by logic is Booleon, yes or
no, true or false. That works great if you're reasoning about certain kinds of
things, but a competent rationalist needs to be more soffisticated.

They need to reason about probabilities. One important skill is taking those
internal estimates, your gut feelings, and converting them into a probability.

Once you start measuring your gut feelings, you can compare them to other
people's gut feelings. You can test how accurate they actually are.

Most importantly, you can notice when they change. Intuition changes silently,
without you noticing. Figuring out that your intuition has changes is an
important step to discoverying *why* it's changed.

#Map and Territory

One of the major assumptions that rationalists make is that there *is* an
underlying reality. 

We use the mataphor that the truth is a Territory and our understanding the Map.

Our goal is to get a better map, so that we can make informed decisions. But we
can't afford to gather a research team and do proper science for every decision,
so we rely on a bunch of "heuristics". Ways of thinking that get us *close* to
the truth without spending a lot of time and money.


#Words Words Words

Words are our primary means of communicating, so there's a lot of rationalist
literature on the various ways they fail, and the ways we fail to use them well.

Let's start with a question. When does a tree stop being a tree and start being
a shrub? Can an object be both a tree and a shrub at the same time?

Words are very loose. They *point* at an idea, but you can't capture the entire
essense of an idea, even one as simple as "tree" in a word.

To be a good rationalist you need to give up words to a certain extent, and
learn not to rely on your internal monologue. To be able to see an idea without
relying on its label.

##Demonstrative Definitions

How would you define the colour red? You could try to describe it as "A colour at the 
end of the spectrum, next to orange and opposite violet". Use yet more words to
decribe it.

Or you could point at a stop sign. An apple. A firetruck.

Defining words using more words leads to madness. To circular definitions that
don't connect to reality in any way.


##Arguing by definition


Try not to. Definitions suck. Try and communicate instead. Ask what they mean by
"word", explain to them what you mean when you say "word". Try to recognize when
you're using different understandings of the same word, and clarify.

##Concept Handles

You're going to talk about complicated ideas that you don't have the words for.
Try not to redefine existing words. Try not to make up new words.

We recomend creating "Concept Handles". Short phrases that describe your idea.

#Changing your mind

The only strength rationality gives you is truth. Unless you can change your
mind, sometimes about ideas that you hold very deeply, it's useless to you.
